# A segmented stream of consciousness

\begin{quote}
\textit{"Consciousness, then, does not appear to itself chopped up in bits. Such words as 'chain' or 'train' do not describe it fitly as it presents itself in the first instance. It is nothing jointed; if flows. A 'river' or a 'stream' are the metaphors by which it is most naturally described. In talking of it hereafter, let us call it the stream of thought, of consciousness, or of subjective life..."}
\end{quote}

This famous passage by William James from his book \textit{The Principles of Psychology} is frequently used to describe the continuous and flowing nature of our conscious experiences. It perfectly captures the intuition that our life experiences ebb and flow like a river, without noticeable breaks or disruptions. The passage is usually cut off at this point, leading the reader to believe that James actually thought of consciousness as a smooth stream of experience.  Ironically, the next line is hardly ever included in the passage, and virtually contradicts the message that comes before it:

\begin{quote}
\textit{"...But now there appears, even within the limits of the same self, and between thoughts all of which alike have this same sense of belonging together, a kind of jointing and separateness among the parts, of which this statement seems to take no account.  I refer to the breaks that are produced by sudden contrasts in the quality of the successive segments of the stream of thought. If the words 'chain' and 'train' had no natural fitness in them, how came such words to be used at all? Does not a loud explosion rend the consciousness upon which it abruptly breaks, in twain? Does not every sudden shock, appearance of a new object, or change in a sensation, create a real interruption, sensibly felt as such, which cuts the conscious stream across at the moment at which it appears? Do not such interruptions smite us every hour of our lives, and have we the right, in their presence, still to call our consciousness a continuous stream?"}
\end{quote}

Considering the passage in its entirety, it is clear that James did view consciousness as a stream, but also recognized that sudden contrasts and novel events in our experiences can create discontinuities in the stream.  Unfortunately, however, the early part of the passage is almost always taken out of context, which not only obscures the point James was trying to make, but also devalues the idea that sudden contrasts in our experiences may help to parse the overwhelming amounts of perceptual information we digest at any given moment into more coherent and manageable units. In other words, the \textit{stream} won the popularity context, and the \textit{contrasts} got the short end of the stick\footnote{Thank you to Dr. Jeff Zacks for pointing this out in his talk at the Context and Episodic Memory Symposium in 2016.}.

When we reflect back on our experiences through memory, it is not as if the floodgates open and out pours all of our experiences like a firehose (or a stream).  Rather, memories are imprints of an experience, and are more akin to mnemonic summaries that are organized with respect to correlated features in the environment, such as the spatial and temporal context in which the experiences occurred [@tulving_organization_1995]. Thus, a fundamental objective of research in the cognitive neuroscience of episodic memory is to characterize the features of an encoding experience that govern organization in memory.

One emerging principle is that shifts in context (i.e. changes perceptual or semantic information) may serve as a cue to the brain to partition experience into \textit{events}, which can be defined as a set of items grouped by a temporally-extended feature of the experience. Event segmentation theory (EST), a framework for how we perceive and segment experience into events, suggests that during an experience, the brain maintains a model of the event in order to make predictions about future input to the system.  For example, when I make a cup of coffee, EST suggests that a model containing the expected sequence of events is maintained in order to guide behavior and complete the task.  Prior research suggests that this has consequences for the mnemonic structure of those experiences [@ezzyat_what_2011; @dubrow_influence_2013].

While its becoming clear that contextual shifts have behavioral consequences for memory organization, the neural mechanisms of this process are not well understood. Previous work using fMRI [@dubrow_temporal_2014; @ezzyat_similarity_2014; @ezzyat_what_2011] has implicated involvement of the hippocampus (along with other cortical regions), but mechanism by which events are formed has not been fully explored. Neural oscillations, or rhythmic changes in neuronal excitability, may be well suited to play a role in this process since they are thought to allow for the association of neural cell assemblies separated in space and/or time [@buzsaki_neuronal_2004].  In this thesis, we sought to test whether and how neural oscillations might support the encoding (and segmentation) of experiences into sequential events in memory.

The broad questions in my research program are 1) how do contextual shifts influence the structuring of our continuous experiences into mnemonic events and 2) do neural oscillations play a role in segmenting experience into distinct events, as well as associating information within the same event?

# The dissertation roadmap

In Chapter 1, I will present a series of three behavioral studies aimed to answer the question: how do sudden contrasts or \textit{event boundaries} in our life experiences impose structure on our memories for those events?  In each experiment, participants were presented with items that are structured into events by a common perceptual feature over multiple adjacent items.  We then test various forms of episodic memory to assess how the 'event' structuring present in the task influences the organization of the items in memory.

In Chapters 2 and 3, I present a body of work investigating how neural oscillations play a role in carving mnemonic events from these structured experiences. Using the same paradigm described above, in Chapter 2 I ask whether oscillatory power dynamics across an encoding experience (i.e. 10s of seconds to minutes) track the event structure embedded into the task, and whether those power dynamics are related to temporal memory organization within and across event boundaries. Finally, in Chapter 3, I zoom in to the single event level and present a series of analyses investigating how the brain might use nested oscillations to encode and temporally order the contents of a single event.

However, before presenting these studies, I review what is currently known about the relationship between neural oscillations and episodic memory (with a focus on temporal sequence memory), as well as models of event perception and memory organization that have strongly influenced this work.

# Neural oscillations

Neural oscillations can be defined as rhythmic cycles of neuronal excitability. Originally discovered by @berger_uber_1929, the study of neural oscillations has amassed a wealth of attention and research over recent years [@buzsaki_neuronal_2004].  This rhythmic brain activity is predominant the .5-500 Hz range in the mammalian brain [ref], and this is highly conserved across species [ref]. While still debated, recent theories suggest that oscillations play an active role in information representation and in human cognition more broadly [@buzsaki_neuronal_2004].  In fact oscillatory neural activity has been related to nearly all subdivisions in the field of cognitive neuroscience: visual and auditory perception, attention, language, working memory and long-term memory.  It is thought that neural oscillations are critical for these mental processes because they represent precisely-timed firing patterns of large populations of neurons in distributed neural networks. Furthermore, oscillations are thought to provide a temporal window for the integration of information represented in distinct neural cell assemblies, often in different locations throughout the brain that fire at different points in time.  Perhaps then, it is not surprising that oscillations are associated with so many cognitive phenomena, as all complex cognitive operations require the coordination and integration of information over multiple populations of neurons.  

Over the course of a few decades of empirical research on neural oscillations, the frequency spectrum of mammalian brain oscillations (i.e. roughly .5 Hz to 500 Hz) has been subdivided into distinct categories by the fact that they tend to cluster into several distinct bands.  Intriguingly, these subdivisions roughly appear to form a linear progression when plotted on a logarithmic scale [ADD THIS REF; see figure 1b in @buzsaki_neuronal_2004].  The bands most commonly studied and cited in the human cognitive literature are delta (1-3 Hz), theta (3/4-8 Hz), alpha (9-12 Hz), beta (13-30 Hz) and gamma (30-100 Hz) and will be the focus of the current work. These distinct bands represent fluctuations in neuronal activity at different temporal rates.  For instance, theta oscillations fluctuate at a relatively slower rate of 3 or 4 to 8 or 9 cycles per second (depending on who you ask), while gamma rhythms oscillate at a much faster rate of greater than 30 cycles per second.  Broadly speaking, slower oscillations are thought to integrate information over longer temporal and spatial scales while higher oscillations are thought to represent more local information processing [ref].  

While a deep treatment of the neuroscience behind brain oscillations is out of the scope of this thesis, in the following paragraphs, I will briefly summarize what is currently known about about the functional properties of neural oscillations with respect to working memory, long-term memory, and temporal sequence representation, as these cognitive subdivisions are all likely at play in the experiments that I will present here. I will also focus more on theta and gamma oscillations, as those frequency bands have been most reliably linked with episodic memory in the literature.

## Working memory

Several studies in humans have observed that power in the theta band during a delay period covaries with working memory (WM) load [@jensen_frontal_2002; @raghavachari_gating_2001;  @raghavachari_theta_2006; @hsieh_neural_2011; @scheeringa_trial-by-trial_2009; @gevins_high-resolution_1997].  To test for load-dependent power modulation, studies have typically presented a variable number of items to participants and have recorded M/EEG or iEEG during a delay period when the participant is presumably maintaining the studied items.  Interestingly, @hsieh_neural_2011 found that theta power over frontal electrodes is relatively greater during the maintenance of temporal information relative to the maintenance of items alone.  They speculated that frontal theta power might represent prefrontal cortex (PFC) control related processes that support the maintenance of associative information [@blumenfeld_putting_2011].  Consistent with the role of prefrontal theta oscillations in working memory, @siegel_phase-dependent_2009 found that neuronal spiking in the PFC during a working memory delay period was phase-locked to an underlying theta/delta oscillation in monkeys. Thus, frontally distributed theta power appears to be related to working memory, but the mechanism remains unclear.  Theta oscillations are prominent in the hippocampus [@buzsaki_theta_2002; @ekstrom_human_2005], which has led some to speculate that the hippocampus might drive prefrontal theta oscillations and coordinate interactions between the two regions [@anderson_theta_2010]. Indeed, there is emerging evidence in rodents for a frontal-hippocampal bidirectional regime of this nature [@place_bidirectional_2016].

Gamma power has also been shown to play a role in working memory and covary with WM load [@howard_gamma_2003; @roux_gamma-band_2012; @van_vugt_hippocampal_2010]. These load modulated effects do not appear to be anatomically specific, as they have been observed in the hippocampus [@van_vugt_hippocampal_2010], in frontoparietal networks [@roux_gamma-band_2012], as well as distributed across the cortex [@howard_gamma_2003].

## Long-term episodic memory

Theta oscillations have also been implicated in the formation [@guderian_medial_2009; @fell_medial_2011; @sederberg_theta_2003; @friese_successful_2013; @summerfield_coherent_2005; @staudigl_theta_2013; @white_theta_2013; @pastotter_distinct_2014; @osipova_theta_2006; @hanslmayr_relationship_2011]  and retrieval [@jacobs_eeg_2006; @addante_prestimulus_2011; @osipova_theta_2006; @bastiaansen_i_2008; @watrous_frequency-specific_2013] of long-term episodic memories.  In humans, hippocampal theta power preceding the encoding of an event is predictive of later memory success [@guderian_medial_2009; @fell_medial_2011; @sederberg_theta_2003].  Similarly, pre-stimulus theta power during retrieval has also been linked to the successful recovery of contextual detail (relative to item memory alone) [@addante_prestimulus_2011; but see @merkow_prestimulus_2014].  The fact that the activity preceded successful encoding/retrieval argues that theta power in these studies may index a mnemonic state that is optimal for memory processes.  Other work suggests that theta power may more specifically represent binding between an item and its associated context.  @summerfield_coherent_2005 found increased theta power and coherence at the scalp when a word and its associated color were successfully encoded (relative to trials where only the word was remembered).  Using a clever manipulation of encoding-test overlap, @staudigl_theta_2013 found that theta power was predictive of successful word encoding only in cases when the same background video clip was presented with the word at retrieval (i.e. the match condition).  Intriguingly, if at retrieval the word was paired with a different video clip (the mismatch condition), relatively lower theta power predicted item memory success.  This finding suggests that memory-related theta oscillations may play a specific role in associative binding, rather than representing a more general memory strength process.  Interestingly, other reports have observed both decreases and increases in theta power during encoding is predictive of successful free recall [@long_subsequent_2014; @burke_synchronous_2013; @greenberg_decreases_2015; @pastotter_distinct_2014].  Together with the findings from @staudigl_theta_2013, these findings suggest that increases in theta power may not be a direct proxy for 'good' memory encoding, but rather relative increases/decreases may depend on the particular encoding task and the type of memory that is being probed.

While the relationship between theta oscillations and episodic memory remains somewhat controversial, increases in gamma power during encoding have been more consistently linked to successful memory formation [@van_gerven_decoding_2013; @sederberg_theta_2003; @osipova_theta_2006; @long_subsequent_2014; @burke_synchronous_2013; @greenberg_decreases_2015; @sederberg_hippocampal_2007] and retrieval [@osipova_theta_2006] in both hippocampus and cortical areas.  In monkeys, [@jutras_gamma-band_2009] found that gamma power and gamma spike field coherence in the hippocampus was related to successful encoding.


## Theta-gamma coupling and a model of sequence encoding

While a great deal has been learned about how the brain supports episodic memory for individual elements within an experience [REFS] as well as neural oscillations support single event encoding, relatively less is known about how the brain supports memory for experiences that are extended in time.  Representing dynamic and temporally-extended experiences requires a neural mechanism that is capable of linking distinct cell assemblies that may not be active at the same time. Importantly, this mechanism must also be able to encode the relative order of information, as relative order is a fundamental property of an temporally-extended episodic memory.  For example, remembering a telephone number requires not only a representation of the numbers themselves, but also the order in which they were presented.  One prominent mechanistic model for how this is implemented in the brain hypothesizes that the contents, or the individual items within an experience, are represented in largely non overlapping cell assemblies firing in the gamma band, while the relative sequential order of the items is coded along the phase of an underlying theta wave [@lisman_storage_1995; @jensen_theta/gamma_1996].  The model was originally designed to explain how multi-item messages might be maintained in working memory, but has been extended to long-term memory as well as proposed to be a more neural mechanism for information processing [@lisman_theta/gamma_2005]. Theoretically, phase coding allows the temporal segregation of activity supporting individual items that are encountered at different times across an experience, and critically may also permit temporally extended experiences to be represented in a time-compressed manner [@jensen_physiologically_1996] (~100-300 ms cycles of neuronal activity).  Furthermore, this time scale would allow for neurons to be linked via long-term potentiation [@bliss_long-lasting_1973], which has been recently shown to support associative memory formation @nabavi_engineering_2014].

In humans, there is evidence for memory-related hippocampal theta-gamma coupling [@axmacher_cross-frequency_2010; @mormann_phase/amplitude_2005; @tort_thetagamma_2009; @lega_slow-theta--gamma_2014; @staudigl_theta_2013] and in cortical regions [@canolty_high_2006; @lee_electrical_2013; @maris_spatially_2011].  One study found that during a working memory delay, encoding-related gamma patterns were reactivated in a periodic manner that was phase locked to a theta oscillation [@fuentemilla_theta-coupled_2010].  Interestingly, [@jacobs_neural_2009] found that while viewing of individual letters during a working memory task, high gamma power (65-128 Hz) was biased toward distinct phases of theta for different letters, and this pattern was most prevalant in occipital cortex.  Finally, [@friese_successful_2013] found that coupling between frontal theta and posterior gamma was predictive of subsequent memory.  Given these results, it is clear that theta-gamma coupling plays a role in memory encoding. However, an outstanding question is whether theta phase coded gamma representations can support memory for the sequence, a critical prediction of the theta-gamma model.

## Hippocampal replay and theta 'sweeps'

In rodents, there is strong evidence that place cell [@okeefe_hippocampus_1971] trajectories in the hippocampus are replayed while awake [@carr_hippocampal_2011] and while asleep [@wilson_reactivation_1994; @skaggs_replay_1996], and this replay is thought to be a mechanism by which experiences are consolidated into long-term memory representations.  There is also evidence that hippocampal experience-dependent firing patterns are phase locked to an underlying theta oscillations, coined hippocampal theta 'sweeps' [@gupta_segmentation_2012]. Sweeps are involved in navigation [@gupta_segmentation_2012], during offline rest periods, and are also involved in planning [@wikenheiser_hippocampal_2015]. Together, these findings suggest that theta-locked replay may be a mechanism by which the hippocampus codes spatiotemporal trajectories, or in other words, sequences of spatial representations.

# Memory organization and models of event formation

A large body of evidence supports the idea that organizational processes engaged at encoding modulate the structure of our memories for those experiences [@atkinson_control_1971; @farrell_temporal_2012; @lee_item_1981; @murdock_distributed_1983; @raaijmakers_search_1981].  These studies converge on the idea that similarities between the features of an encoding experience may

Event Segmentation Theory (EST) has formalized the idea that ‘segmentation’ processes parse ongoing experience into events and serve to guide efficient allocation of cognitive processing resources in the moment [@reynolds_computational_2007; @zacks_event_2007].  This model proposes that incoming perceptual information and prior experience are actively integrated in working memory to generate predictions about what is likely to occur in the near future.  At event boundaries, when future input may be unpredictable or ‘surprising’, attention is drawn to novel perceptual features in the environment and integration processes are halted.  Prior behavioral and neuroimaging results support the notion that people are sensitive to event boundaries [@radvansky_across_2012; @speer_temporal_2005; @zacks_event_2007; @swallow_event_2009; @zacks_human_2001] and that memory for information at boundaries is enhanced [@boltz_temporal_1992; @newtson_perceptual_1976; @schwan_cognitive_2004].
